---
title: "4 - Introduction to Algorithms"
date: 2023-08-31
id: 13
author: "Preet Suthar"
authorGithub: "https://github.com/preetsuthar17"
tags:
  - DSA Tutorial
---

## Introduction to Algorithm

- An algorithm is a step-by-step solution to any real-life problem.
- An algorithm is a sequence of instructions that can act on some input data to produce some output, within the limited number of steps.
- Algorithm is independent of any programming language.
- An Algorithm is not a complete code or program. it is the solution to any problem that can be expressed using pseudo code.

## Characteristics of Algorithm

- Input:
  - An algorithm must have either zero or a limited amount of input.
- Output:
  - At least one output must be generated by any algorithm.
- Definiteness:
  - Every step in the algorithm must be clear and straightforward.
- Finiteness:
  - An algorithm must be completed in a limited number of steps.
- Effectiveness:
  - Every step of an algorithm must be effective or have some meaning.
- Correctness:
  - For every input, an algorithm should produce the correct output.
- Feasibility:
  - An algorithm must be feasible [possible to implement].
- Independence:
  - An algorithm should have step-by-step direction which should be independent of any programming code.

## Advantages of the Algorithm

- It is a step-by-step representation of a real-life solution.
- It is easier to understand.
- It is not dependent on any programming language.
- It can work as a blueprint for the program to develop.
- By using an algorithm the problem is broken down into smaller parts hence it is easy for a programmer to convert it into an actual program.

## Disadvantages of an Algorithm

- It is time-consuming.
- It is difficult to show branching and looping in an algorithm.
- Big problems are difficult to solve using algorithms.
